hello this is chef john from food wishes
comm with an Italian meatball inspired
prison style meatloaf that's right you
know that old saying if you can't do the
time and you don't like me loaf with a
lot of filler don't do the crime well
that comes from the fact that large
institutions like this that have what
we'll call a captive audience tend to
use a lot of filler and bulking products
in a meat loaf and while saving money
and crushing souls is the main reason
they do it it does actually produce a
meat loaf that's very juicy and
incredibly tender so every once in a
while I do enjoy making a meat loaf in
this style and here's how we're going to
put it together so in a saute pan on a
medium high heat I'm going to melt some
butter and a little bit of olive oil and
once that butter melts we're going to
dump in some diced onions with a big
pinch of salt and we're going to saute
those stirring occasionally until
they're kind of golden brown and we're
definitely gonna want to do this step
first because this mixture will need to
cool before it goes into the meat so
anyway let's go ahead and saute those
onions until nice and golden and at that
point we're going to go ahead and dump
in our finely minced garlic I got about
four cloves and we're not even going to
really cook this we're just going to
stir it in and as soon as it is mixed in
all we'll do is turn off the heat and
let that sit on the stove until it cools
down to room temperature so our onions
are all set and it's on to another step
we want to do ahead of time the soaking
of the breadcrumbs and it's these crumbs
right here in particular the amount of
crumbs that makes this what I'm calling
a prison style meatloaf so I'm basically
going to use twice as much bread crumb
as what would normally be called for in
a modern meatloaf recipe and I made
these myself but any plain very dry
white bread crumb will work and then
what we're going to do is we're going to
pour over milk and soak these bread
crumbs for about 15 or 20 minutes to
make what I've always called a slurry
although I'm not sure if that's
technically correct but basically what
we're gonna do is mix that up and let it
sit there for about 15 or 20 minutes
till it absorbs all the milk and don't
be in a hurry see after about 10 minutes
they look like this and you may think
hey that looks soaked we're good to go
but they're not you'll see in another 10
or 15 minutes they're going to look like
that
see how those have swollen up so that's
what you want to wait for and once we
have our onion mixture cooled and our
breadcrumbs soaked in milk we are ready
to proceed with the rest of the mixture
so in a bowl I have two pounds of ground
beef I like to use chuck I like the 85
215 lean to fat blend but 80/20 will
also work beautifully and we'll go ahead
and season up this meat with some salt
and
freshly ground black pepper and then
let's go ahead and also give it a little
shot of cayenne that's going to provide
some beautiful caged heat we're also
going to go ahead and dump in a couple
beaten eggs along with some freshly
chopped to tell you parsley and also a
nice handful of freshly grated Reggiano
parmesan and you know of all the things
I would have trouble getting adjusted to
in prison life besides of course the
constant physical assaults it would be
getting used to eating fake Parmesan
cheese I mean talk about cruel and
unusual but anyway we're going to dump
in some parmesan and we'll also go ahead
and add our now cooled onion mixture and
then last but not least we're going to
go ahead and add our breadcrumbs but
before we do I want you to go ahead and
grab a handful and squeeze out any
excess milk right we want these crumbs
damp we don't want them dripping wet and
you're not going to squeeze a lot of
milk out but like I said squeeze out
what you can and then we'll add the
crumbs to the mixture and then we'll go
ahead and take a spatula and mix that
entire thing together thoroughly and of
course the reason we're using moist
soaked crumbs is because dry crumbs pull
moisture away from the meats but if we
use moist crumbs that doesn't happen so
you end up with a much moister much more
tender product and as it starts to come
together you can really see how much
filler we have in here all right by the
time we're done this meatloaf is only
going to be basically half meat which is
great news for you people that enjoy
America's fast food chains so we're
gonna keep mixing until it looks like
that at which point we're going to
transfer that into a lightly greased
baking dish are you something nice and
large a couple inches deep is perfect
and then what you're gonna do is you're
going to wet your hands and form this
into the classic loaf shape so I think
about four or five inches across is
perfect and about three inches higher or
so and by the way a cake might be fine
to hide a small little file in but with
the size and shape of this thing you
could totally hide a hacksaw allegedly
but anyway we're going to go ahead and
manipulate that meat mixture and to an
appropriately shaped loaf and then if
you want you could bake it just like
that but personally I do like to glaze
my meat loaves and/or cook them in sauce
and because I am doing a meatball
inspired version I decided to go with
the tomato sauce and the reason it's
that color is because I added some
balsamic vinegar which I thought would
be totally amazing which was totally not
amazing but I'll talk about that in the
blog post I'm gonna recommend you just
use your favorite tomato sauce but
anyway I ladle that into my dish as well
as over the top and in addition to
flavor and color it's also going to make
for a beautifully moist cooking
environment
which always works when baking me loaf
and once we've covered that surface in
the sauce we're going to go ahead and
transfer that into the center of a 325
degree oven for about an hour and 10
minutes or until we reach an internal
temperature of about 155 all right one
of the few ways to screw up a meatloaf
is to overcook it so check with a
thermometer if you can and after about
an hour and ten minutes mine look like
this but anyway once you pull your
meatloaf out you should probably let it
sit there at least 10 minutes before you
slice into it and if you don't I'm gonna
hear about it Oh someone will drop a
dime on you so let it rest a little bit
and then we're going to go ahead and
slice in and start to analyze this
alternative and I think fascinating
version of meatloaf now normally I would
slice this with my Shiv but it was in
the dishwasher so I'm just going to use
a regular knife and other than the fact
I didn't like the balsamic vinegar and
the sauce I used this was absolutely
delicious and very very meatball like
and in addition to the extreme
tenderness it's also going to remain
incredibly juicy I mean look at that I
mean is that not the juiciest meatloaf
you've ever seen so anyway let's go
ahead and cut a proper slice even though
the flavors were kind of an Italian
meatball theme I still went with some
mashed potatoes and I also served it
with a little bit of arugula but I
really think any kind of tossed salad
would work here and even though I wasn't
crazy about my particular sauce I
decided to go ahead and garnish with it
anyway you know for the sake of the
pictures but anyway that's it what I'm
calling prison style meatloaf like I
said every once in a while I do like to
use this method if made properly my
meatloaf should bring all the boys from
the yard and they'll be like it's better
than mine and if you do give it a go I
think you'll find it guilty of being
fantastic so I really do hope you give
it a try and hope you continue to enjoy
it for at least 25 years to life so head
over to food witch's calm for all the
ingredient amounts and more info as
usual and as always enjoy
you